--- p1 ---
Page No. 1
Uttam fasal Uttam Enam
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE MARKET 
(e-NAM) A National Portal for eTrading
e-NAM 
DIRECTORY
Small Farmers’ Agri-Business Consortium
(Lead Implementing Agency)
 Department of Agriculture, Cooperation &  Farmers’ Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare
Government of India

--- p2 ---
Page No. 2

--- p3 ---
Page No. 3
Page No. 3
e-NAM Directory 
Celebration of 
BHARAT KA AMRUT MAHOTSAV
The 75 Year of 
th
Independence of India 
National Agriculture Market
(e-NAM)
Small Farmers’ Agri-Business Consortium
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare
Government of India
Uttam fasal Uttam Enam
www.enam.gov.in

--- p4 ---
Page No. 4
CONTENT:
Sl. No.
Item
Page No.
Foreword Messages
5-7
1
Background of Agricultural Marketing: 
9
2
Need of Reforms in Agriculture Marketing -
9
3
What is National Agriculture Market (e-NAM)?
9
4
Objective of eNam
10
5
Pre-requisite (Marketing Reforms Mandatory) for Joining e-
NAM:
10
6
e-NAM Process Flow
10
7
eNAM coverage as on 31st March 2021
11
8
Features of e-NAM
11
9
Modules  of e-NAM
12
10
Mobile Application
12
10.1
Facilities to Farmers on Mobile Application are
12
11
Beneﬁts to Farmers
13
12
All India performance of eNAM at a glance (till 31st March 
2021)
13
13
List of 175 commodities having quality parameters notiﬁed 
in eNAM
13
14
Details of eNAM mandis in states
15-185
Uttam fasal Uttam Enam
www.enam.gov.in

--- p5 ---
Page No. 5
Uttam fasal Uttam Enam
www.enam.gov.in
National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) is an innovative initiative in agricultural marketing to enhance 
farmers accessibility digitally to multiple number of markets & buyers and to bring transparency in trade 
transactions with the intent to provide transparency in price discovery, price commensurate with quality 
of the produce and also to develop the concept of One Nation One Market for agriculture produce. 
Government of India has always been supporting the idea of strengthening Agricultural Produce Market 
Committees (APMCs) and making them more competitive through improving services and 
infrastructure. Government has been providing assistance to APMCs for infrastructure and value chain 
development through various schemes like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna - RAFTAAR, Agriculture 
Market Infrastructure (AMI), National Agriculture Market (eNAM), Agri. Infrastructure Fund (AIF) and 
Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure Fund (AMIF), etc. Through e-NAM, APMC markets of the States 
are being strengthened by providing assistance for infrastructure like Computer hardware, IT 
infrastructure, assaying, cleaning, grading, sorting, packaging and compost unit in the e-NAM mandis. 
e-NAM has come a long way since April 2016. So far, total 1000 Agriculture Produce Market Committee 
(APMC) markets have been integrated with e-NAM across 18 states & 3 Union Territories in the country. 
Achievements of e-NAM have been path breaking and revolutionary in Agri-marketing sector. e-NAM is 
now going to expand further by adding 1000 additional mandis as announced by Hon'ble Finance 
Minister Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman in her Union Budget speech of 2021. e-NAM is also being developed 
as Platform of Platforms to create a digital ecosystem that leverage the expertise of individual platforms 
across various segments of Agri value chain. 
I am happy to learn that on the occasion of 5th Anniversary of National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) 
scheme during "Bharat ka Amrut Mahotsav, an "e-NAM Directory" is published which aims to provide 
important information about all eNAM mandis. I am sure that this book will help and guide the farmers, 
FPOs and other stakeholders regarding e-NAM process and other important beneﬁts.
I wish all readers an enriching experience about National Agriculture Market.
(Sanjay Agarwal)
SANJAY AGARWAL
SECRETARY 
Foreword
 Hkkjr ljdkj
 Ïf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k] ea=ky; 
Ïf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku dY;k.k foHkkx
 Department of Agriculture, Cooperation &  Farmers’ Welfare
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare
Government of India
April 12, 2021
Oﬃce: Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001, दूरभाष / Phone: 23382651, 23388444, फैƛ सं. / Fax No.: 23386004
E-mail: secy-agri@gov.in

--- p6 ---
Page No. 6

--- p10 ---
Page No. 10
4. Objectives of e-NAM:
The main objectives of the Scheme are;
i.
to promote better marketing opportunities for farmers / sellers through online access to 
more buyers / markets, removal of information asymmetry between  farmer and trader, 
better and real-time price discovery  based on actual demand and supply of agri-
commodities, transparency in auction process, prices commensurate with quality of 
produce, online payment etc. that contribute to marketing eﬃciency;
ii.
to establish quality assaying systems for quality assurance to promote informed bidding 
by buyers; 
iii.
to streamline marketing / transaction procedures and make them uniform   across all  
markets to promote eﬃcient functioning of the markets; 
iv.
to integrate markets ﬁrst at the level of the States and eventually across the country 
through a common online market platform, to facilitate pan- India trade in agricultural 
commodities; 
5. Pre-requisite (Marketing Reforms Mandatory) for Joining e-NAM:
For pursuing reforms in the focussed manner, out of various areas of reforms, department 
identiﬁed 3 reforms and made them mandatory as pre-condition for the state to participate in e-
NAM scheme. These area of reforms are summarised as given below:
i.
To promote and permit  e-trading;
ii.
Single point levy of market fee;
iii.
Uniﬁed registration/ license  for trade/  transaction in more than one market;
These three are mandatory reforms for e-NAM as pre-requisite for a state to become eligible for 
joining the e-NAM scheme. 
6. e-NAM Process Flow
Uttam fasal Uttam Enam
www.enam.gov.in

