--- p1 ---

--- p2 ---
MIDH
1 
 
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 
 MISSION FOR INTEGRATED DEVELOPMET OF HORTICULTURE                
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for the holistic growth of the horticulture sector covering fruits, 
vegetables, root & tuber crops, mushrooms, spices, flowers, medicinal & aromatic 
plants, coconut, cashew, cocoa, bamboo and other horticulture crops.  While 
Government of India (GOI) contributes 60%, of total outlay for developmental 
programmes in all the States except States in North East and Himalayas, 40% share 
is contributed by State Governments.   In the case of North Eastern and Himalayan 
States, GOI contribution will be 90% and 10% share is contributed by these States. 
For programmes of National Horticulture Board (NHB), Coconut Development Board 
(CDB), Central Institute for Horticulture (CIH), Nagaland National Level Agencies 
(NLA) and UTs without legislature GOI contribution will be 100%.  Guidelines 
regarding implementation of the scheme are described hereunder.  
1.2 
MIDH will have the following sub-schemes and area of operations:  
Sl. 
No.
Sub Scheme 
Target group / Area of operation  
1. 
NHM 
All States & UTs except States in NE and Himalayan 
Region covering all districts.  
2. 
HMNEH 
All States in NE and Himalayan Region covering all 
districts.  
3. 
NBM 
 All States and UTs 
4. 
NHB 
All States & UTs focusing on commercial horticulture 
5. 
CDB 
All States and UTs  
6. 
CIH 
NE States, focusing on HRD and capacity building 
MIDH will work closely in convergence with other schemes towards development of 
all horticulture crops. 
1.3 
MIDH will also provide technical advice and administrative support to State 
Governments/ State Horticulture Missions (SHMs) for horticulture specific 
commodities and other horticulture related activities funded by Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY). 
 
MIDH Operational Guidelines 2025
Guidelines dated 31.12.2024

--- p3 ---
MIDH
2 
 
2. 
MISSION OBJECTIVES 
2.1 
Main objectives of Mission are:  
a) Promote holistic growth of horticulture sector, including bamboo and coconut 
through area based regionally differentiated strategies, which includes 
research, technology promotion, extension, post harvest management, 
processing and marketing, in consonance with comparative advantage of 
each State/region and its diverse agro-climatic features;  
b)  Encourage farmers to take activities in cluster approach. 
c) Enhance horticulture production, augment farmers' income and strengthen 
nutritional security;  
d) Improve productivity by way of quality germplasm, planting material and water 
use efficiency through Micro Irrigation; 
e) Support skill development and create employment generation opportunities 
for rural youth in horticulture and post harvest management, especially in the 
cold chain sector; 
f) Enhance production of high value horticulture crops to reduce import 
dependence. 
 
3. 
STRATEGY 
3.1 
To achieve above objectives, the mission will adopt the following strategies: 
a) Adopt an end-to-end holistic approach covering pre-production, production, 
post harvest management, processing and marketing for appropriate returns 
to growers/producers; 
b) Create commodity crop specific CoEs in the country to encourage technology 
adoption. 
c) Promote and adoption of new technologies for horticulture crops with special 
focus on cold chain infrastructure for extending the shelf life of perishables; 
d) Improve productivity through:  
 
i. Diversification, from traditional crops to plantations, orchards, vineyards, 
flowers, vegetable gardens, medicinal plants and bamboo plantation.  
ii. Extension of appropriate technology to farmers for high-tech horticulture 
including protected cultivation and precision farming.  
iii. Increase of acreage of orchards and horticulture crops, particularly in 
States where total area under horticulture is less than 50% of agricultural 
area 
MIDH Operational Guidelines 2025
Guidelines dated 31.12.2024

--- p4 ---
MIDH
3 
 
e) Improve post harvest management, processing for value addition and 
marketing infrastructure. 
f) Adopt a coordinated approach and promote partnership, convergence and 
synergy among R&D, processing and marketing agencies in public as well as 
private sectors, at the National, Regional, State and district levels; 
g) Support capacity-building and Human Resource Development at all levels. 
 
4. MISSION STRUCTURE 
(I) 
National Level 
a)  
General Council 
4.1 The Mission will have a General Council (GC) at National level under 
Chairmanship of Union Agriculture Minister.  The composition of GC will be as 
follows: 
Minister of Agriculture 
: 
Chairman 
Ministers of Commerce, Food Processing Industries, Rural 
Development, Development of North Eastern Region 
(DONER), NITI Aayog, Member (Agriculture)   
: 
Members 
Secretary, Agriculture & FW 
Director General, ICAR 
Additional Secretary (I/C of Horticulture, DA& FW) 
: 
: 
: 
Member 
Member 
Member 
Managing Director, NHB 
: 
Member 
Chairman, CDB 
: 
Member  
Horticulture Commissioner 
: 
Member 
Growers' representatives & Experts from Horticulture Sector, 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry 
(FICCI). (7Members) 
: 
 
Members 
 
Joint Secretary, DA & FW & Mission Director                               :    Member Secretary
 
 
4.2 
GC will be the apex body giving overall direction and guidance to Mission, 
monitor and review its progress and performance, without affecting the pattern of 
assistance as approved by CCEA.  GC will be empowered to lay down and amend 
operational guidelines including cost norms as well as modification of operational 
nature and addition or deletion of any crop or component. GC will meet at least once 
a year. Tenure of non-official members of GC will be for three years from the date of 
nomination. 
 
MIDH Operational Guidelines 2025
Guidelines dated 31.12.2024

--- p5 ---
MIDH
4 
 
b) 
Executive Committee: 
4.3 
Executive Committee (EC), headed by Secretary, Department of Agriculture &  
FW (DA&FW), will oversee activities of the Mission.  The EC will comprise of the 
following: 
Secretary (A& FW) 
:
Chairperson 
Secretaries - Ministry/Department of AYUSH, Food Processing 
Industries, Rural Development, M/o DONER, Bio-Technology, 
Cooperation 
:
Members 
Principal Adviser (Agriculture), NITI Aayog 
:
Members 
Institutions – Director General, ICAR; Director General ICFRE, 
Director General, CSIR; Additional Secretary (In charge of 
Horticulture, DA&FW); Additional Secretary & FA, DA&FW; Joint 
Secretary (Plant Protection). Horticulture Commissioner; Adviser 
(Horticulture Statistics); Chairman, APEDA; Managing Director, 
NHB; CEO CDB; Agriculture Marketing Advisor, DA&FW; COO 
(NCCD) 
:
Members 
Three Experts (Production, Post Harvest Management and 
Marketing) 
:
Members 
Joint Secretary, DA&FW & Mission Director 
:
Member 
Secretary
 
4.4 
EC is empowered to approve projects on the basis of approved subsidy 
norms. EC is also empowered to approve special interventions for tackling 
emergent/unforeseen requirements.  EC can also constitute Empowered Monitoring 
Committee (EMC) at Central Level and delegate powers to EMC for approving 
projects of CoEs and NLAs in accordance with approved cost norms and pattern of 
assistance. EC will also consist of three non-official experts in the field of Production, 
Post Harvest Management and Marketing. Tenure of the experts will be for three 
years from the date of nomination.  
 
4.5 
Horticulture Division in DA&FW will provide the necessary support to 
GC/EC/EMC and will administer NHM, HMNEH, NBM and CIH.  Managing Director 
(NHB) will oversee the programmes of NHB while CEO, CDB will oversee the CDB 
programmes.  The existing structure of the Boards and Missions will be maintained 
to provide general directions for these programmes.   EC/EMC will ensure smooth 
functional linkages among different agencies and meet at least once a year or as 
required. 
MIDH Operational Guidelines 2025
Guidelines dated 31.12.2024

--- p6 ---
MIDH
5 
 
(II) 
State Level 
A) State Level Sanctioning Committee 
 
4.6 
For NHM, HMNEH and NBM, State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) 
under Chairmanship of Chief Secretary having representatives from other concerned 
Departments of State Government including Forests, the State Agricultural 
Universities (SAU), Institutes under Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
FPOs, etc will approve the Annual Action Plan of MIDH, and oversee the 
implementation of programmes of the respective States. 
 
B) State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) at State Level: 
A State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) would be constituted at the State level 
under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary (Horticulture)/APC/ACS having 
representatives’ from Ministry of Agriculture (GoI) NCCD, Department of State 
agriculture, Finance, banking sector and other relevant departments. State Mission 
Director NHM, HMNEH and NBM will be Member Secretary of the concerned SLEC.  
At operational level, State Governments will have freedom to establish State 
Horticulture Mission (SHM) and/or State Bamboo Development Authority (SBDA) as 
a suitable agency for implementing Mission programmes at State and District levels. 
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI) existing in the State will be involved in the 
implementation of the programme.  
 
4.7 
State and District level structures will be established keeping in view the 
specific requirement of the States. Formation of Farmer Groups/ Cooperatives of 
farmers and their tie-up with Financial Institutions and Market Aggregators would be 
encouraged. 
 
4.8 
State level agency will have the following functions: 
a) Prepare Strategic/Perspective and annual State Level Action Plan in 
consonance with Mission's goals and objectives and in close co-ordination with 
Technical Support Group, SAUs and ICAR institutes and oversee its 
implementation; 
b) The State Missions will follow a cluster based approach for promotion of 
horticulture and for focused intervention-economies of scale. States may go for 
identification of crop specific clusters and preferred/required relaxations in the 
provisions for the same. 
MIDH Operational Guidelines 2025
Guidelines dated 31.12.2024

--- p7 ---
MIDH
6 
 
c) States must develop a fair transparent system of seeking application from 
beneficiaries and providing benefit/assistance under the program.   
d) Organize base-line survey and feasibility studies for distinct areas/clusters 
(District, sub-District, or a group of Districts) to determine status of 
horticultural/bamboo production, potential and demand, and tailor assistance 
accordingly. Similar studies would also be undertaken for other components of 
the programme; 
e) Receive funds from Central Government, State Government and other sources 
for carrying on Mission's activities, maintain proper accounts thereof and submit 
utilization certificate to concerned agencies. State will also maintain SNA 
account as per instructions of GoI in order to ensure transparency in use of 
funds released by Center as well as by State under the programme;  
f) Release funds to implementing organizations and oversee, monitor & review 
implementation of the programmes;  
g) Assist and oversee implementation of schematic activities in the States through 
farmers, societies, Self-Help Groups, State institutions and other similar 
entities; 
h) Organize workshops, seminars and training programmes for all interest 
groups/associations at State level, with the help of SAUs, ICAR Institutes, 
KVKs and other institutions having technical expertise; 
i) Operationalize 
Information 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICT) 
enabled 
Management Information System (MIS) up to grass root level through MIDH 
SURAKSHA PORTAL. Each State will develop and host its own web site.  
j) State will ensure updation of progress