--- p1 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI SCHEME 
 
 
(PM-KISAN SCHEME) 
 
 
 
 
 
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES  
 
(REVISED AS ON 21.6.2019) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION & FARMERS’ WELFARE 

--- p2 ---
2 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI (PM-KISAN) SCHEME 
 
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 
 
(REVISED AS ON 21.6.2019) 
 
1. 
Scheme  
 
With a view to provide income support to all landholding farmers’ families in the country, 
having cultivable land, the Central Government has implemented a Central Sector 
Scheme, namely, “Pradhan Mantri KIsan SAmman Nidhi (PM-KISAN)”.  
 
2. 
Objective and Benefits 
 
The scheme aims to supplement the financial needs of all landholding farmers’ families 
in procuring various inputs to ensure proper crop health and appropriate yields, 
commensurate with the anticipated farm income as well as for domestic needs. Under 
the Scheme an amount of Rs.6000/- per year is released by the Central Government 
online directly into the bank accounts of the eligible farmers under Direct Benefit 
Transfer mode, subject to certain exclusions. 
 
3. 
Definition of farmer’s family 
 
A landholder farmer’s family is defined as “a family comprising of husband, wife 
and minor children who own cultivable land as per land records of the concerned 
State/UT”.  The existing land-ownership system will be used for identification of 
beneficiaries for calculation of benefit.     
 
4 
Exclusions 
 
4.1 
The following categories of beneficiaries of higher economic status shall not be 
eligible for benefit under the scheme: 
 
(a) 
All Institutional Land holders; and 
 
(b) 
Farmer families in which one or more of its members belong to following 
categories : 
 
i) Former and present holders of constitutional posts 
 
ii) Former and present Ministers/ State Ministers and former/present  Members of 
Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha/ State Legislative Assemblies/ State Legislative 
Councils,former and present Mayors of Municipal Corporations, former and 
present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.  
 
iii) All serving or retired officers and employees of Central/ State Government 
Ministries /Offices/Departments and its field units Central or State PSEs and 
Attached offices /Autonomous Institutions under Government as well as regular 

--- p3 ---
3 
 
employees of the Local Bodies (Excluding Multi Tasking Staff / Class IV/Group D 
employees) 
 
iv) All superannuated/retired pensioners whose monthly pension is Rs.10,000/-or 
more (Excluding Multi Tasking Staff / Class IV/Group D employees) 
 
v) All Persons who paid Income Tax in last assessment year. 
 
vi) Professionals like Doctors, Engineers, Lawyers, Chartered Accountants, and 
Architects registered with Professional bodies and carrying out profession by 
undertaking practices.  
4.2 For the purpose of exclusion State/UT Government can certify the eligibility of the 
beneficiary based on self declaration by the beneficiaries. In case beneficiary is not 
available / does not reside in the village, State/UT Governments may consider 
certification based on the declaration by other adult member of his/her family. In 
case of incorrect self declaration, beneficiary shall be liable for recovery of 
transferred financial benefit and other penal actions as per law. 
5. Methodology for calculation of benefit 
5.1 
The benefit shall be paid to only those farmers’ families whose names are 
entered into the land records. Exception has, however, been made for North-East 
States and Jharkhand in this regard. 
 
5.2 
The cut-off date for determination of eligibility of beneficiaries under the scheme 
shall be 01.02.2019 and no changes thereafter shall be considered for eligibility of 
benefit under the scheme for next 5 years. However, this date is not applicable when 
transfer of ownership of cultivable land takes place on account of succession due to 
death. 
 
5.3 
Benefit will be allowed in those cases where transfer of ownership of cultivable 
land takes place on account of succession due to death of the landowner. However, 
those eligible farmers whose names have been entered in the land record after 
01.12.2018 till 01.02.2019 shall be eligible for the benefits from the date of entry of land 
rights in the land records. In such cases where, transfer of ownership of cultivable land 
has happened due to any reason which could be purchase, succession, will, gift, etc., 
between 01.12.2018 and 31.01.2019, the installment pertaining to the trimester 
December, 2018 - March, 2019 during the financial year (2018-19) shall be 
proportionate amount from date of transfer till 31.03.2019 with respect to the 4 months 
period. 
 
5.3.1 In cases where the land records have not been updated for rights accruing due to 
succession on account of the death of land owners before 01.12.2018, such updation of 
land records may be done by the States in a time bound manner.  The successors 
whose names are entered in land records for rights accrued as aforementioned shall be 
eligible subject to fulfilment of other conditions of the Scheme and the exclusion 
clauses.  
 

--- p4 ---
4 
 
5.3.2 Clause 5.3 of the Operational Guidelines, which provides for proportionate 
amount of financial benefit under the scheme to be transferred in the bank accounts of 
the beneficiaries in cases involving transfer of ownership between 01.12.2018 to 
31.01.2019, shall remain applicable to the cases of succession as well which is clear 
from the wording of the said clause. 
 
5.3.3 Subsequent to 01.02.2019, there could be change in ownership due to the 
following reasons:- 
 
i) 
Transfer of ownership due to inheritance resulting out of death of the land 
owner.  In such cases the family of the successors would be entitled to the 
benefits, if otherwise eligible as per scheme guidelines. 
ii) 
In cases of cultivable land transferred to other persons through Sale Deed, 
Partition Deed, Gift Deed, etc., the transferee will not be eligible under the 
Scheme as he/she was not the land owner as on 01.02.2019.  However, in 
such cases even the transferor of the land will become ineligible if the 
family of the transferor does not have any cultivable land subsequent to 
such a transfer. 
 
5.3.4 The State Governments have to put in place the administrative mechanism 
based on their existing land revenue administrative regime to take care of formulations.  
There should be clear cut responsibility entrusted to the officials responsible for 
undertaking mutation of land records. 
 
i) 
In case of correction of land record for recording land ownership accrued 
due to inheritance before 01.12.2018 then the eligibility of the family under 
the scheme shall be properly determined as per the conditions of the 
scheme. The procedure for determining the eligibility as per the exclusion 
clauses shall remain as prescribed. 
ii) 
In case of transfer of land ownership due to inheritance, reassessing the 
eligibility of the family under PM KISAN -  If the family is no longer eligible, 
then the same have to be updated in the PM KISAN portal so that the 
benefits can be discontinued subsequently.  In case of family of the 
deceased land owner is still eligible (where spouse or the minor children 
are having cultivable land and eligible as per guidelines), the details of the 
new beneficiary alongwith other details with the fresh self-declarations 
have 
to 
be 
provided 
to 
the 
concerned 
authorities 
for 
inclusion/modifications so that the benefit to the survivors of the family can 
continue. 
iii) 
Subsequent to inheritance if the families of the inheritors also become 
freshly eligible under PM Kisan then all the details of the freshly eligible 
families have to be incorporated in the database so that benefits start 
accruing to such families from the date when inheritance became 
operational. 
iv) 
In case of transfer of cultivable land for reasons other than death after 
01.02.2019, the officials have to reassess the eligibility of the transferor 
and decide whether the benefits have to be stopped or not and intimate 

--- p5 ---
5 
 
the authorities so that the PM KISAN portal can be updated.  Transferees 
are not entitled for any benefits under PM KISAN in such cases. 
 
5.4 
The beneficiaries, whose names are uploaded on PM-Kisan Portal by the 
State/UT Government in a particular 4-month period / trimester, shall be entitled to 
receive benefit for that trimester and for further installments pertaining to the 
subsequent trimesters for that financial year. 
 
5.5 
In some of the North Eastern States, the land ownership rights are community 
based and it might not be possible to assess the quantum of Land holder farmers. In 
such States an alternate implementation mechanism for eligibility of the farmers will be 
developed and approved by the Committee of Union Ministers of Ministry of 
Development of North East Region (DoNER), Ministry of Land Resources, Union 
Agriculture Minister and concerned State Chief Ministers or their Ministerial 
representative, based on the proposal by the concerned North Eastern States.  
 
5.5.1 For identification of bona fide beneficiary under PM-Kisan Scheme in Manipur, the 
following proposal of Government of Manipur was considered and approved by the 
Committee: 
 
“The certificate issued by the Village authority, namely, the Chairman/Chief, authorizing 
any tribal family to cultivate a piece of land, may be accepted. Such certification of 
village Chairman/Chief shall be authenticated by the concerned sub-divisional officers. 
All the exclusions under the Operational Guidelines will be applicable.” 
 
5.6 
For identification of bona fide beneficiary under PM-Kisan Scheme in Jharkhand, 
the following proposal of Government of Jharkhand was considered and approved by 
the Committee:  
“The farmer will be asked to submit ‘Vanshavali (Lineage)’ linked to the entry of land 
record comprising his \ her ancestor’s name giving a chart of successor. This lineage 
chart shall be submitted before the Gram Sabha for calling objections. After approval of 
the Gram Sabha, the village level \ circle level revenue officials will verify and 
authenticate the Vanshawali and possession of holding. This authenticated list of 
farmers after due verification of succession chart shall be countersigned by the District 
level revenue authority. Farmers’ names, subject to the exclusion criterion after 
following the aforementioned process, shall be uploaded on the PM-Kisan portal along 
with other required details for this disbursement of benefit under the scheme.”  
6. 
Strategy for Implementation  
 
6.1 
The States shall prepare database of eligible beneficiary landholder farmer 
families in the villages capturing the Name, Age, Gender, Category (SC/ST), Aadhaar 
Number, Bank Account Number and the Mobile Number of the beneficiaries. 
Responsibility of identifying the landholder farmer family eligible for benefit under the 
scheme shall be of the State/UT Government. In case of beneficiaries in States of 
Assam, Meghalaya, J&K where Aadhaar number has not been issued to most of the 
citizens, Aadhaar number shall be collected for those beneficiaries where it is available 
and for others alternate prescribed documents such as Driving Licence, Voters’ ID Card, 

--- p6 ---
6 
 
NREGA Job Card, or any other identification documents issued by Central/State/UT 
Governments or their authorities, etc. can be collected for identity verification purposes. 
These three States have been exempted from the requirement of Aadhaar number till 
31.3.2020. In the meantime these States will complete Aadhaar enrolment. States/UTs 
shall ensure that there is no duplication of the payment transferred to eligible families.  
Speedy reconciliation in case of wrong/incomplete bank details of the beneficiary should 
be ensured. 
 
6.2  
For the purpose of exclusion States have to take a self declaration from the 
beneficia