--- p1 ---

--- p2 ---
2 
 
Table of Contents 
1.0 Background 
4 
2.0 One District One Product 
5 
3.0 Programme Contents 
6 
 
4.0 Individual Category 
7 
5.0 Group Category 
8 
6.0 Support for common infrastructure 
10 
7.0 Branding and Marketing Support 
11 
8.0 Capacity Building & Research 
13 
9.0 Institutional Architecture 
16 
10.0 Studies & Reports 
26 
11.0 Project Implementation Plan (PIP) 
26 
12.0 Disbursement of Funds 
27 
13.0 Procedure with Banks for Grant 
29 
14.0 MIS 
30 
15.0 Empanelment of Expert Institutions 
31 
16.0 Convergence Framework 
31 

--- p3 ---
3 
 
Abbreviations and Acronyms 
 
DPR 
Detailed Project Report 
DLC 
District Level Committee 
FPI 
Food Processing Industry 
FPO 
Farmer Producer Organisation 
FUP 
Firm level Upgradation Plan 
GOI 
Government of India 
FME 
Formalization of Micro Enterprises 
IA 
Implementing Agency 
IMEC 
Inter Ministerial Empowered Committee 
IIFPT 
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology 
MIS 
Management Information System 
MOFPI 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
MoU 
Memorandum of Understanding 
MSDE 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
MSME 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
NCDC 
National Co-operative Development Corporation 
NIFTEM 
National Institute for Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management 
NGO 
Non-governmental Organizations 
NRLM 
National Rural Livelihood Mission 
ODOP 
One District One Product 
PEC 
Project Executive Committee 
PIP 
Project Implementation Plan 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
PMKSY 
Pradhan Mantri Kishan Sampada Yojana 
PMU 
Project Management Unit 
R&D 
Research and Development 
RP 
Resource Person 
SC 
Schedule Caste 
ST 
Schedule Tribe 
SHG 
Self Help Group 
SIDBI 
Small Industries Development Bank of India 
SLAC 
State Level Approval Committee 
SNA 
State Nodal Agency 
SRLM 
State Rural Livelihood Mission 
TOR 
Terms of Reference 
UT 
Union Territory 

--- p4 ---
4 
 
1.0 
Background 
1.1 
Overview 
1.1.1 The unorganized food processing sector in the country comprises nearly 25 lakh 
food processing enterprises which are unregistered and informal. With only 7% of 
investment in plant & machinery and 3% of outstanding credit, the unorganized 
enterprises contribute to 74% of employment (a third of which are women), 12% of 
output and 27% of the value addition in the food processing sector. Nearly 66% of 
these units are located in rural areas and about 80% of them are family-based 
enterprises1. Most of these units falls under category of micro manufacturing units 
in terms of their investment in plant & machinery and turnover. 
1.1.2 The unorganized food processing industry in India faces challenges that limit its 
development and weakens performance. These challenges include: (a) lack of 
productivity and innovation due to limited skills and access to modern technology 
and machinery for production and packaging; (b) deficient quality and food safety 
control systems, including lack of basic awareness on good hygienic and 
manufacturing practices;(c) lack of branding & marketing skills and inability to 
integrate with the supply chains, etc.;(d) capital deficiency and low bank credit. 
1.1.3 Unorganized micro food processing units, need intensive hand holding support for 
skill training, entrepreneurship, technology, credit and marketing, across the value 
chain, necessitating active participation of the state government for better 
outreach. In the last decade, Central and State Governments have made intensive 
efforts to organize farmers in Food Processing Organisations (FPOs) and women’s 
Self Help Groups (SHGs). SHGs have achieved considerable progress in thrift and 
their repayment record with 97% NPA level is among the best. Governments have 
made efforts to enable SHGs to undertake various manufacturing and service 
sector activities including food processing. However, there are few Government 
schemes to support FPOs and SHGs to make investment and upscale their 
operations. 
1.1.4 This scheme is a centrally sponsored scheme that is designed to address the 
challenges faced by the micro enterprises and to tap the potential of groups and 
cooperatives in supporting the upgradation and formalization of these enterprises. 
1.2 Aims 
1.2.1 The scheme aims to: 
i) 
Enhance the competitiveness of existing individual micro-enterprises in the 
unorganized segment of the food processing industry and promote 
formalization of the sector; and 
 
 
 
1NSSO, 2015 

--- p5 ---
5 
 
ii) Support Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Self Help Groups (SHGs) and 
Producers Cooperatives along their entire value chain. 
1.3 
Objectives 
1.3.1 The objectives of scheme are to build capability of microenterprises to enable: 
i) 
Increased access to credit by existing micro food processing entrepreneurs, 
FPOs, Self Help Groups and Co-operatives; 
ii) Integration with organized supply chain by strengthening branding & 
marketing; 
iii) Support for transition of existing 2,00,000 enterprises into formal framework; 
iv) Increased access to common services like common processing facility, 
laboratories, storage, packaging, marketing and incubation services; 
v) Strengthening of institutions, research and training in the food processing 
sector; and 
vi) Increased access for the enterprises, to professional and technical support. 
1.4 
Outlay 
1.4.1 The scheme envisages an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore over a period of five years 
from 2020-21 to 2024-25. The expenditure under the scheme would to be shared 
in 60:40 ratio between Central and State Governments, in 90:10 ratio with North 
Eastern and Himalayan States, 60:40 ratio with UTs with legislature and 100% by 
the Center for other UTs. 
1.5 
Coverage 
1.5.1 Under the scheme, 2,00,000 micro food processing units will be directly assisted 
with credit linked subsidy. Adequate supportive common infrastructure and 
institutional architecture will be supported to accelerate growth of the sector. 
 
2.0 
One District One Product 
2.1 The Scheme adopts One District One Product (ODOP) approach to reap the benefit 
of scale in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common services and 
marketing of products. ODOP for the scheme will provide the framework for value 
chain development and alignment of support infrastructure. There may be more 
than one cluster of ODOP product in one district. There may be cluster of ODOP 
product consisting of more than one adjacent district in a State. 
 
2.2 The States would identify the food product for a district, keeping in perspective the 
focus of the scheme on perishables. A baseline study would be carried out by the 
State Government. The ODOP product could be a perishable agri produce, cereal 
based product or a food product widely produced in a district and their allied sectors. 
Illustrative list of such products includes mango, potato, litchi, 

--- p6 ---
6 
 
tomato, tapioca, kinnu, bhujia, petha, papad, pickle, millet based products, 
fisheries, poultry, meat as well as animal feed among others. In addition, certain 
other traditional and innovative products including waste to wealth products could 
be supported under the Scheme. For example, honey, minor forest products in 
tribal areas, traditional Indian herbal edible items like turmeric, amla, haldi, etc. 
Support for agricultural produce would be for their processing along with efforts to 
reduce wastage, proper assaying and storage and marketing.  
2.3 With respect to support to existing individual micro units for capital investment, 
preference would be given to those producing ODOP products. However, existing 
units producing other products would also be supported. In case of capital 
investment by groups, predominately those involved in ODOP products would be 
supported. 
2.4 Support to groups processing other products in such districts would only be for 
those already processing those products and with adequate technical, financial 
and entrepreneurial strength. 
2.5 New units, whether for individuals or groups would only be supported for ODOP 
products. 
2.6 Support for common infrastructure and marketing & branding would only be for 
ODOP products. In case of support for marketing & branding at State or regional 
level, same products of districts not having that product as ODOP could also be 
included. 
2.7 Department of Commerce is focusing on agriculture crops on a cluster approach 
for support for exports under the Agriculture Export Policy and Ministry of 
Agriculture is also focusing on cluster approach for development of specific agri- 
produce in districts having comparative advantage. A number of states have 
adopted similar cluster based development. The ODOP approach of the Scheme 
would lead to ease in providing common facilities and other support services. 
 
3.0 Programme Components 
 
3.1 The programme has four broad components addressing the needs of the sector: 
 
i) 
Support to individual and groups of micro enterprises; 
ii) 
Branding and Marketing support; 
iii) 
Support for strengthening of institutions; 
iv) 
Setting up robust project management framework. 
3.2 Details of each of these components are described below. 

--- p8 ---
8 
 
4.3.2 Applications would be invited at the district level on an ongoing basis for Units, 
from those interested in availing the benefits under the Scheme. Resource Persons 
(RPs) would undertake survey of various clusters and identify units that show 
potential for availing benefits under the Scheme. For applications received directly, 
RPs would undertake field verification and due diligence to assess their potential. 
4.3.3 All the potential cases based on identification of Units directly by RPs and 
application received would be submitted before the District Level Committee. 
District Level Committee should study the report submitted by RP for each Unit 
and interview the interested persons. 
4.3.4 Due diligence to be carried out by the RP for each Unit should have the following 
details: 
i) Annual Turnover of the enterprise; 
ii) Track Record of payments by the enterprise; 
iii) Existing infrastructure; 
iv) Backward and Forward Linkages; 
v) Proximity to clusters; 
vi) Marketing linkages of the enterprise. 
4.3.5 For the cases recommended by the District Level Committee/SNA, RPs should 
help them in preparation of DPR for availing bank loan for upgradation of the Unit. 
The DPR along with necessary documents should be submitted to the Banks for 
sanction of loan. 
4.4 
The procedure delineated above would apply for selection of new units also, 
provided the ODOP baseline study throws up a need / potential for such new 
investments. 
4.5 
State Governments should decide at what level they would want to finalize 
individual micro units list to be supported, by DLC or at SNA level. Similarly, for 
applications for capital investment by groups, common infrastructure & marketing 
& branding, the states should decide the role of DLC/SNA in routing of applications. 
 
5.0 
Group Category 
 
5.1 
The Scheme would support clusters and groups such as FPOs/SHGs/ producer 
cooperatives along their entire value chain for sorting, grading, assaying, storage, 
common processing, packaging, marketing, processing of agri-produce, and 
testing laboratories. 
 
5.2 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs)/Producer Cooperatives 
5.2.1 FPOs and Producer Cooperatives would be provided the following support: 

