--- p1 ---

--- p2 ---
Affordable Housing in Partnership
Standard Operating Procedure
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Urban 2.0
April 2026
Government of India
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs

--- p3 ---

--- p4 ---
नरेΥ मोदी 
माननीय Ɂधानमंȼी
घर ϟसफǯ ज़ǨरतȄ से नहǵ, घर स̒
ान से भी जुड़ा होता है, ͗
ाϟभमान से जुड़ा होता है और एक बार जब घर बन जाता है तो 
घर के हर सद͕
 कǷ सोच भी बदलती है, आगे बढ़ने का नया 
हौसला पैदा होता है। हमारा Ɂयास है, हर पϗरवार कǷ इस ज़ǧरत 
को पूरा करना और उसके स̒
ान को बढ़ाना।

--- p5 ---
Housing is not merely a policy priority, it is a maƩer of dignity, empowerment and social jusƟce. The Government of India 
is unwavering in its resolve to ensure that every family has a pucca roof over their heads. Guided by the visionary 
leadership of Hon'ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi, the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban was launched in 2015 
with the historic commitment of achieving Housing for All.
In the past decade, this resolve has translated into unprecedented outcomes. With over 97 lakh pucca houses completed 
and handed over to beneﬁciaries across the country, PMAY-U has not only built homes but also restored dignity, 
strengthened women's ownership, and empowered lakhs of urban poor families. By its sheer scale, transparency and 
speed of implementaƟon, PMAY-U stands today among the largest and most impacƞul urban housing programmes in the 
world.
As India moves decisively on the path of rapid urbanisaƟon and economic transformaƟon, the aspiraƟons of our urban 
ciƟzens are rising. Recognising this, the Government launched PMAY-U 2.0 with the bold objecƟve of providing pucca 
houses to an addiƟonal one crore urban families, ensuring that the momentum of development leaves no one behind.
The Aﬀordable Housing in Partnership (AHP) verƟcal under PMAY-U 2.0 represents our commitment to cooperaƟve and 
parƟcipatory development. It seeks to acƟvely mobilise the strengths of both public insƟtuƟons and private enterprises, 
encouraging proacƟve parƟcipaƟon and leveraging their experƟse, innovaƟon and resources to deliver aﬀordable 
housing at scale. This comprehensive guideline issued by the Ministry on AHP verƟcal of PMAY-U 2.0 will certainly provide 
a transparent, accountable and result-oriented framework for implementaƟon of AHP projects naƟonwide.
I am conﬁdent that this guideline will further accelerate the pace of construcƟon and ensure Ɵmely delivery of quality 
houses to eligible urban beneﬁciaries. I call upon State Governments, Urban Local Bodies, public agencies and private 
developers to partner in this naƟonal mission with renewed dedicaƟon.
Together, let us reaﬃrm our commitment to Housing for All, transforming aspiraƟons into reality, empowering families 
with security and dignity and strengthening the foundaƟon of inclusive and sustainable urban development as we march 
forward towards a Viksit Bharat.
(Manohar Lal)

--- p6 ---
Message
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana–Urban (PMAY-U), envisioned under the dynamic leadership of Hon'ble Prime Minister 
Narendra Modi, has empowered the poor and marginalized secƟons of society with a digniﬁed place to call home. 
By ensuring access to safe and aﬀordable housing, the Mission has not only transformed urban landscapes but also 
strengthened access to beƩer health, educaƟon and livelihood opportuniƟes. PMAY-U stands as a testament to our 
Government's unwavering commitment to Housing for All and inclusive, people-centric urban development that 
leaves no family behind.
As we move forward into the next phase of PMAY-U 2.0 to address the addiƟonal demand of 1 crore urban 
households, our Government has once again demonstrated its ﬁrm belief in cooperaƟve federalism and outcome-
driven governance. The Mission is implemented through diﬀerent verƟcals, among which Aﬀordable Housing in 
Partnership (AHP) plays a pivotal role in leveraging both public and private sector parƟcipaƟon to accelerate 
housing delivery and ensure scale, speed, and transparency. 
This Standard OperaƟonal Guidelines clearly arƟculate the framework for implementaƟon of AHP through both 
public and private agencies. It deﬁnes the roles and responsibiliƟes of all stakeholders, streamline procedures for 
project applicaƟon and approval, thereby strengthening transparency and accountability at every stage. 
I believe that adopƟon of this guideline will further enhance the implementaƟon mechanism and bridge the gap 
between ciƟzens, implemenƟng agencies and Government insƟtuƟons in eﬀecƟve planning, implementaƟon and 
monitoring of AHP projects under PMAY-U 2.0 in a structured, transparent and outcome-oriented manner.
With the collecƟve eﬀorts of all stakeholders, I am conﬁdent that PMAY-U 2.0 will play a transformaƟve role in 
shaping a stronger and more prosperous naƟon. Through this Mission, we reaﬃrm our resolve to build an inclusive 
and developed India, advancing steadily towards the vision of a Viksit Bharat. 
(Tokhan Sahu)

