--- p1 ---
Tata AIG General Insurance Company Ltd. 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 13 
TATA AIG General Insurance Company Limited  
Regd. Office: 15th Floor, Tower A, Peninsula Business Park, Ganpatrao Kadam Marg, Lower Parel, Mumbai- 400013, 
Maharashtra, India. 
IRDA Registration No. 108  UIN no., CIN no. U85110MH2000PLC128425,  
TEL +91-22-66699696  
For more information call the Tata AIG Helpline 1800-266-7780 
www.tataaig.com 
 
Public Liability Insurance Policy – Special Purpose 
Policy Schedule 
1. 
Policy No 
Section I – 0304011815 
Section II – 0304011816 
 
2.  
Insured 
1. Indian Oil Corporation Limited  
Indian Oil Bhawan Bandra (E), Mumbai – 400 051  
2. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited  
Bharat Bhavan, 4&6 Currimbhoy Road, Ballard Estate, Mumbai – 400 001  
3. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited  
Hindustan Bhawan, Ballard Estate, Mumbai – 400 001 
 
3. 
 Policy 
Period 
Effective date of Insurance Policy: 01 April 2026 
Expiry date of Insurance Policy: 31 March 2027 
 
4. 
Territorial 
Limit 
ANYWHERE IN INDIA 
 
5. 
Jurisdiction 
Limit 
INDIA 
 
6. 
Limit 
of 
Liability 
INR 100 crores in aggregate for Section I, sub-limited to INR 25 crores in aggregate for 
Section II 
 
7. 
Details 
of 
Insurance 
SECTION I:  
The liability to pay compensation for loss of life, injury or damage in accordance with 
the law of the country awarded by the court of law, consumer forums, NHRC orders or 
orders from any statutory body, in connection with accidents attributed to LPG, 
provided such accident occur due to circumstances (situation of risk) covered below. 
 
Circumstances (situation of risk):  
 
1. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are carried out of the bottling plant.  
 
2. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are in transit in the hands of approved transporters.  
 
3. The policy will include the filled cylinders stored in the distributor’s premises. The 
policy will also include cylinders stored at authorized retail outlets/ any authorized point 
of sales (POS) etc. The word ‘authorized’ shall mean having valid agreement/ MOU 
with LPG distributors/ Oil Marketing Companies. 
 
4. Whilst the filled cylinders are in transit from Oil Marketing Companies/ distributor’s 
premises to registered customer’s premises/ by customer under cash and carry system. 
The movement will cover direct supplies of LPG cylinders/ Free – trade LPG (FTL) 
cylinders in transit to customer by distributor and indirect supplies through any 
authorized Point of Sales (POS) having valid agreement/MOU with LPG distributors/ Oil 
Marketing Companies etc; and/or whilst the filled and empty cylinders are in transit from 
registered customer/ by customer under cash and carry system, to the distributor’s 
premises/ POS / concerned Oil Marketing Companies. The movement will also cover 
LPG cylinders/ Free – trade LPG (FTL) cylinders in transit from customer and indirect 
supplies through any authorized point of sale (POS) having valid agreement/ MOU with 
LPG distributors/ Oil Marketing Companies.  

--- p2 ---
Tata AIG General Insurance Company Ltd. 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 13 
TATA AIG General Insurance Company Limited  
Regd. Office: 15th Floor, Tower A, Peninsula Business Park, Ganpatrao Kadam Marg, Lower Parel, Mumbai- 400013, 
Maharashtra, India. 
IRDA Registration No. 108  UIN no., CIN no. U85110MH2000PLC128425,  
TEL +91-22-66699696  
For more information call the Tata AIG Helpline 1800-266-7780 
www.tataaig.com 
 
 
 
5. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are being used/lying in the registered customer’s 
premises. However, the clause of registered customer premises will not apply for Free 
– trade LPG (FTL) customers as the customer are enrolled based on only proof of 
identity. Cash memo issued by authorized LPG distributor/ any authorized point of sale 
(POS) having valid agreement/ MOU with LPG distributors/ Oil Marketing Companies 
will also be the base for insurance cover for LPG cylinders/ Free – trade LPG (FTL) 
cylinder customers.  
 
6. Whilst the empty cylinders are being carried back to the bottling plant. 
 
7. Whilst arising out of the use of LPG supplied by the insured / distributor or POS 
authorized by insured in Reticulated system, Community Kitchens, other applications 
like geysers, lighting, generator sets and irrigation pumps etc.  
 
8. Whilst the cylinder is being connected to LPG installation or being disconnected from 
LPG installation.  
 
9. LPG used in Educational Institutions, Research Laboratories, Govt./ Municipal 
Hospitals, Midday meal schemes, Social Welfare Institutions being run for Child 
welfare/women welfare / social welfare Institutions (Children homes, old age homes, 
and homes for disabled persons etc.)  
 
10. Restaurants, Hotels, private Hospitals / Clinics, Poultry Farms, Grain drain, brick 
kilns, Ceramic Industry, Agricultural applications, cottage Industry, heat treatment, 
Glass Industry, any other Industry using LPG. 
The Insurer will indemnify the insured against their legal liability established by the 
court of law to pay compensation including the claimant cost, fees and expenses 
anywhere in India in accordance with Indian law in the event of: 
 
a) Accidental bodily injury/loss of life to any person (not being a person engaged in 
and upon the service of the insured at the time of occurrence giving rise to such 
injury not a person claiming against the Insured under any workmen’s 
compensation Act)  
b) Accidental damage to property (not being property of or belonging to or in custody 
or under the control of the Insured or any person in the services of the Insured or 
upon which the insured or any such person is or has been working if that damage 
result directly from such work) happening during the period of insurance in 
connection with leakage of LPG as described in the tender document.  
 
Cover:  
Per Event: Rs. 1.5 Crores 
Per Year: Rs. 100 Crores 
 
Where event means specific accident arising out of the circumstances as mentioned in 
the policy. 
 
Deductibles/ Excess:   
INR Rs. 10,000/- will be deducted only for claims settled under Section -I 

--- p3 ---
Tata AIG General Insurance Company Ltd. 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 13 
TATA AIG General Insurance Company Limited  
Regd. Office: 15th Floor, Tower A, Peninsula Business Park, Ganpatrao Kadam Marg, Lower Parel, Mumbai- 400013, 
Maharashtra, India. 
IRDA Registration No. 108  UIN no., CIN no. U85110MH2000PLC128425,  
TEL +91-22-66699696  
For more information call the Tata AIG Helpline 1800-266-7780 
www.tataaig.com 
 
 
 
 
SECTION II:  
Personal Accident cover for loss of life, bodily injury and property damage at authorized 
customers registered premises. However, the clause of registered customer premises 
will not apply for FTL customers as the customer are enrolled based only on proof of 
identity (irrespective of Liability at Law)  
 
S.no. Cover required 
Limit 
1 Personal 
accident (Death) 
Rs. 10 lakhs per person per event 
2 Medical 
Expenses 
Rs.30 lakhs per event (Maximum Rs. 4 lakhs per person, 
Immediate relief up to Rs. 50,000/- per person) 
3 Property 
Damage 
Maximum Rs. 4 lakhs per event at authorized customer’s 
registered premises 
4 For Policy Period Rs. 25 crores 
Where event means specific accident arising out of the circumstances as mentioned 
in the policy 
 
If compensation to the extent of entire personal accident cover under Section II is 
exhausted, the cover will be increased by payment of additional premium which is 
matching with enhancement value beyond Rs 25 Crore. The quantum of excess 
claim will be assessed as and when compensation to the extent of entire personal 
accident cover is paid, latest by end of the last day of the extended reporting period. 
The additional premium plus applicable tax element for the excess claim will be 
shared in the ratio of 50:25:25 by IOC, BPC and HPC respectively and input tax 
credit   relief shall be availed individually by the OMC’s . Accordingly, the insurance 
company will be required to issue separate invoices to each of the OMCs. 
 
Circumstances:  
1. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are carried out of the bottling plant.  
2. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are in transit in the hands of approved transporters.  
3. The policy will include the filled cylinders stored in the distributor’s premises. The 
policy will also include cylinders stored at authorized retail outlets/ any authorized 
point of sales (POS) etc. The word ‘authorized’ shall mean having valid agreement/ 
MOU with LPG distributors/ Oil Marketing Companies.  
4. Whilst the filled cylinders are in transit from Oil Marketing Companies/distributor’s 
premises to registered customer’s premises/ by customer under cash and carry 
system. The movement will cover direct supplies of LPG cylinders/ Free – trade 
LPG (FTL) cylinders in transit to customer by distributor and indirect supplies 
through any authorized Point of Sales (POS) having valid agreement/MOU with LPG 
distributors/ Oil Marketing Companies etc; and/or whilst the filled and empty 
cylinders are in transit from registered customer/ by customer under cash and carry 
system, to the distributor’s premises/ POS / concerned Oil Marketing Companies. 
The movement will also cover LPG cylinders/ Free – trade LPG (FTL) cylinders in 
transit from customer and indirect supplies through any authorized point of sale 
(POS) having valid agreement/ MOU with LPG distributors/ Oil Marketing 

--- p4 ---
Tata AIG General Insurance Company Ltd. 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 13 
TATA AIG General Insurance Company Limited  
Regd. Office: 15th Floor, Tower A, Peninsula Business Park, Ganpatrao Kadam Marg, Lower Parel, Mumbai- 400013, 
Maharashtra, India. 
IRDA Registration No. 108  UIN no., CIN no. U85110MH2000PLC128425,  
TEL +91-22-66699696  
For more information call the Tata AIG Helpline 1800-266-7780 
www.tataaig.com 
 
Companies. 
 
5. 5. Whilst the filled LPG cylinders are being used/lying in the registered customer’s 
premises. However, the clause of registered customer premises will not apply for 
Free – trade LPG (FTL) customers as the customer are enrolled based on only 
proof of identity. Cash memo issued by authorized LPG distributor/ any authorized 
point of sale (POS) having valid agreement/ MOU with LPG distributors/ Oil 
Marketing Companies will also be the base for insurance cover for LPG cylinders/ 
Free – trade LPG (FTL) cylinder customers.  
6. Whilst the empty cylinders are being carried back to the bottling plant. 
7. Whilst arising out of the use of LPG supplied by the insured / distributor or POS 
authorized by insured in Reticulated system, Community Kitchens, other 
applications like geysers, lighting, generator sets and irrigation pumps etc.  
8. Whilst the cylinder is being connected to LPG installation or being disconnected 
from LPG installation.  
9. LPG used in Educational Institutions, Research Laboratories, Govt./ Municipal 
Hospitals, Midday meal schemes, Social Welfare Institutions being run for Child 
welfare/women welfare / social welfare Institutions (Children homes, Old age 
homes, and homes for disabled persons etc.)  
10. Restaurants, Hotels, private Hospitals / Clinics, Poultry Farms, Grain drain, brick 
kilns, Ceramic Industry, Agricultural applications, cottage Industry, heat treatment, 
Glass Industry, any other Industry using LPG. 
8. 
Policy 
Premium 
 
9. 
Deductible 
INR 10,000 will be deducted only for claims settled under Section I 
 
10. Intermediary 
details 
Direct 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned being duly authorized by the Company and on behalf of the Company has 
hereunto set his hand at Mumbai this 01stday of April 2026.  
GSTIN:  27AABCT3518Q1ZW Maharashtra, Service Accounting Code: 9971 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stamp Duty of Rs.0.50/- is paid as provided under Article 47(B) of Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and included in 
Consolidated Stamp Duty Paid to the Government of Maharashtra Treasury vide Order of Addl. Controller of 
Stamps, Mumbai at General Stamp Office, Fort, Mumbai - 