--- p1 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
–––
1 | P a g e
CSR Guideline
For Sanitation 
Programme
Government of India
Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation
“Business has a 
responsibility to 
give back to 
community”

--- p2 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
Table of Content
S.No
Topic
Page
Number
1.
Why CSR in Sanitation
3
2.
Guideline on Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability 
4
3.
Objective with regard to Sanitation 
5
4.
Methodology
5
5.
Type of Activities 
5
6.
Identification of Gram Panchayat for implementation of Sanitation 
projects
6
7.
Role of Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
6
8.
Design & Construction of Community Toilet
7
9.
Monitoring mechanism
7
10.
Tri-party agreement (TPA)
7
11.
Operation and Maintenance 
7
12.
Conclusion
7
13.
Annexure –A- Layout of Community Toilet
8
2 | P a g e

--- p3 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
1. Why CSR in Sanitation 
India has a massive problem of open defecation. The World Health Organization (WHO)
and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimate that there are more than 620
million people practicing open defecation in the country, or nearly half the population of
India. Open defecation is prevalent among all socio-economic groups in rural India though
the bottom two wealth quintiles bear the heaviest burden. Children—already vulnerable
and marginalized—pay the highest price in respect of their survival and development.
This well-established traditional behaviour is deeply ingrained through a practice which is
transfered from parents to children. Other reasons cited for its persistence in India include
poverty (the inability to afford toilets), landlessness and tenants in housing without toilets,
and deep-rooted cultural and social norms that have established open defecation as an
acceptable habit.
Poor sanitary measures set India back by Crores of rupees every year due to illnesses,
and its cost, to rural families and to the economy, as a whole, in terms of productivity
losses, and expenditure on medicines and public health care are enormous. As per World
Bank statistics, India’s GDP stands at 1.3 Trillion dollars and we are currently ranked 11th
in the world on the basis of nominal GDP. If we could cut down expenses incurred due to
illnesses and lack of productivity due to illnesses, our economy would get further impetus. 
The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation administers the Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
(NBA) in the rural areas of the country. The objective of NBA is to accelerate the
sanitation coverage in the rural areas so as to comprehensively cover the rural
community through renewed strategies and saturation approach. Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
(NBA) envisages covering the entire community for saturated outcomes with a view to
create Nirmal Gram Panchayats.  As per the Census 2011, the rural coverage of access
to toilet facilities has reached 32.70%. The Ministry is committed to having India Open
Defecation Free (ODF) by 2022, but to achieve this, requires combined fresh action and
efforts/initiative    from all quarters whether from Government, Corporate or from Non
Government organizations.
In a country like India, where more than 26% rural people live below the poverty line,
assuring basic hygiene for one and all is a major task. Poor sanitation affects the health
of the people of the country, also the development of the nation. Women are the most
affected by lack of proper sanitation. For instance in India a large number of girls drop out
of school because of lack of separate toilets in the school for girls. Only 22% of them
manage to complete class 10.
Coming to waste management in India especially in rural areas, waste is a severe threat
to public health. Though, solid waste generated in rural areas is predominantly organic
and biodegradable, yet it is becoming a major problem as the solid waste generated
(organic and recyclable alone) is of the order of 0.3 to 0.4 million metric tons per day. It is
further estimated that rural India is also generating liquid waste (greywater) of the order of
15,000 to 18,000 million liters per day. As a result, in the absence of proper disposal of
solid waste and disposed of greywater/ waste water from hand pumps etc, it is leading to
vector born diseases such as diarrhoea, Malaria, Polio, Dengue, Cholera, Typhoid, and
3 | P a g e

--- p4 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
infections like schistosomiasis. Close to 88% of the total disease load in rural areas is due
to lack of clean water and sanitation and due to improper solid and liquid waste
management: Even with large advancements in supply of clean water to rural areas , the
major problems still remaining to be solved are  in sanitation and in liquid and solid waste
management. Some of the latest available statistics in this regard are as under:-  
•
5 of the 10 top killer diseases of children aged 1-14 in rural areas are related to water
and sanitation. 
•
Almost 1500 children die every day from diarrheal diseases. 
•
Results in high rate of infant and children under-5 mortality. The rural IMR is 62 as
compared to urban which is just 42 (NFHS-3) 
•
The water and sanitation related disease not only affects the nutritional status of the
children but also impacts their attendance in the school. Close to 50% of school
going children in rural areas do not reach class V.
Government of India is targeting the sanitation aspects through it Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
for decades and still the problem persists, which clearly indicate that Government
incentives alone are not enough and are required to be supplemented by private industry
and by the CPSEs through CSR.
2. Guideline on Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability  
Under the Guideline on Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability for Central
Public Sector Enterprises, all CPSEs are supposed to be spending a certain earmarked
fund each year in creating and sustaining socially beneficial projects. Para 1.4.9 of the
said guidelines, provides freedom  to   the CPSEs to select their CSR and Sustainability
projects from a vast range of available options including activities relating to water
sector and restoration to environmental sustainability. 
As per the guidelines on CSR, all profit making Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSEs), including Maharatna CPSEs are required to select CSR activities and to
undertake them in a project mode, and are required to allocate a budget mandatorily
through a Board Resolution as a percentage of previous year’s net profit in the following
manner (Para 1.5.1 of Guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility and Sustainability
for Central Public Sector Enterprises, 1st April 2013):
PAT of CPSE in the previous year
Range of Budgetary allocation CSR and
Sustainability activities
 (as % of PAT in previous year)
Less than Rs. 100 Crore
3% - 5%
Rs. 100 Crore to Rs. 500 Crore
2% - 3%
Rs. 500 Crore and above
1% - 2%
Loss making CPSEs are not required to earmark specific funding for CSR activities. 
As per CSR guidelines, the CSR policy of the business entity should provide for an
implementation strategy and include identification of projects/activities, setting
measurable physical targets and timeframe, organizational mechanism and
4 | P a g e

--- p5 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
responsibilities, time schedules and monitoring. Companies may partner with local
authorities, business associations and civil society/NGOs
As per Section 135 of Company Bill passed by Lok Sabha on 18th December 2012 (Bill
No. 121-C of 2011) and Gazette of India 30th August 2013 (but yet to be notified ),   every
company having net worth of rupees five hundred Crore or more, or turnover of rupees
one thousand Crore or more or a net profit of rupees five Crore or more during any
financial year shall constitute a Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board
consisting of three or more directors, out of which at least one director shall be an
independent director. The Board of every company shall ensure that the company
spends, in every financial year, at least two percent of the average net profits of the
company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of
its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
3. Objective with regard to Sanitation 
The main objective of the CSR Guideline with regard to Sanitation would be as under:- 
•
To promote better human health and improve quality of life among people living in
rural areas through improved sanitation measures, including adoption and creation
of Adarsh Gram (model village) for all types of Water and Sanitation activities
which may include individual and community toilets and decentralized Solid and
Liquid Waste Management projects, Menstrual Hygiene projects, Environmental
Sustainability projects, rain water harvesting,water recycling and any other related
activities.
•
Move towards Nirmal Bharat by 2022 with Gram Panchayats attaining Nirmal
status.
4. Methodology 
•
CPSEs and Corporate Houses may partner with Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation, local authorities and leading National level NGOs having sufficiently
long experience in constructing and maintaining of Public toilets, constructing
individual toilets and/or Solid and Liquid Waste Management projects etc in the
relevant field, depending upon what projects are being offered under CSR.
. 
5. Type of Activities 
•
Construction of Community Toilets- Community toilet with water connection and
disposal pits (leach pits tanks, septic tanks etc.), and with toilets seats for men
and women, bathing spaces, ramp for physically challenged, toilet for physically
challenged, child friendly toilets, nappie changing room, creche, space for washing
clothes etc. (the design can be varied as per local demand) could be implemented
independent to Adarsh Gram.
•
Adarsh Gram in terms of Water and Sanitation-All habitations, schools and
Aganwaris within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat to have individual and / or
Community   toilet facilities and access to water for drinking and sanitation. CSR
activity may include providing all left out items (without duplication with
Government  ongoing /completed projects which should be certified ) in sanitation,
and  water connection to toilets .Prefab  plastic toilets with prefab super structure
5 | P a g e

--- p6 ---
Guide line For CSR Guideline for Sanitation 
could also be considered, if that  helps achieve ODF status quickly  or  is more
durable. 
•
Solid and Liquid Waste  Management  - Effective management of solid and
liquid waste such that the village environment is kept clean at all times
•
Menstrual Hygiene - Good menstrual hygiene is crucial for the health,
education, and dignity of girls and women. .CSR activity could cover production
of sanitary pads and /or their safe disposal through incinerater etc. 
•
IEC and awareness and advocacy including training to householders, masons,
plumbers at ground level in design and construction of toilets etc. including
manufacture of local input materials.
6. Identification of Gram Panchayat for implementation of
Sanitation projects
The CPSEs /Private Corporate houses may suggest the name of the Gram Panchayat(s)
where they wish to implement the CSR or else the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation may obtain from the States/UTs and provide to the CPSEs/Private Corporate
houses such names of Gram Panchayat where CSR projects can be implemented by
them as well as may initiate identifying portions of Government/Panchayat/State land etc.
for the said purpose, which the state government/district administration would be
expected to offer without cost to the CSR project. Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation will play a facilitating role between CPSEs/Private Corporate houses and the
state /District administration/ Gram Panchayat where ever required.
The identification of required Sanitation projects may be carried out by CPSEs /
Corp