--- p1 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
1 
 
 
 
OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES 
 
UNIFIED PACKAGE INSURANCE SCHEME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 2016 
 
 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001 

--- p2 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
2 
 
 
Unified Package Insurance Scheme (UPIS) 
Operational Guidelines 
 
A. General Provisions 
 
1. The UPIS will be implemented in 45 selected districts on Pilot basis from Kharif 2016 
season. A farmer (both Loanee and Non- Loanee) can access to Banks whereas non-
loanee farmer shall be covered through banks and/or insurance intermediaries. 
 
2. UPIS contain total 7 Sections out of which Section 1 (PMFBY) is mandatory. However, 
farmers have to choose at least 2 other sections (out of remaining 6) to avail the 
applicable subsidy under PMFBY section.  
 
3. The cover will be for one full year except for section 1 (which will be bi-annual 
separately for Kharif and Rabi seasons) renewable from year to year.  
 
4. The scheme would be offered / administered through AIC & empanelled General 
Insurance companies to be selected as implementing agency of PMFBY.  
 
5. If the farmer has already availed any insurance policy covering any of sections (2-6) and 
sum insured not less than as mentioned in the UPIS than they would be exempted from 
taking such section(s). However details of such policy would be provided in their 
proposal form. 
 
6. The farmers are required to fill up and sign the proposal cum declaration form giving all 
the required details in the relevant sections which they wish to avail. Such filled and 
signed proposal form shall be submitted along with the premium to the 
bank/intermediary/insurance company who will issue a stamped/signed receipt for the 
same. The proposal form is mandatory for both loanee and non loanee farmers. Such 
acknowledged proposal form will be the basis of insurance and the terms and conditions 
of the insurance will be available on the website www.agri-insurance.gov.in.  
 
7. After accepting the proposal forms from farmers, banks shall provide unique reference 
number to such proposal forms. Acknowledgement shall be provided by banks to the 
farmers. Such acknowledgements shall have the same unique reference number which is 
given to proposal forms.  
 
8. No change in the particulars furnished in the proposal form will be admissible unless 
specifically agreed in writing by insurance company. 
 
9. The Bank will continue to have existing tie-up with the same insurance companies except 
for PMFBY. If the existing tied up company does not agree with the term and conditions 
of UPIS (Section 2 to 7), then implementing crop insurance company will arrange 
insurance for other sections.  
 
 
 
 
 

--- p3 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
3 
 
 
Section 1: Crop Insurance  
 
(Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY) / Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme 
(WBCIS) 
 
Section 2: Personal Accident Insurance 
 
(Coverage as per Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana - PMSBY) 
 
Details of Scheme: The scheme will be a one year cover, renewable from year to year, Accident 
Insurance Scheme offering accidental death and disability cover for death or disability on 
account of an accident. There will be no change in the existing relationship structure of Bank-
insurance company which was established for PMSBY and here also the premium will be 
submitted to the insurance company with which bank is already tied up. If the farmer has already 
availed this section in the form of PMSBY, he/she need not to choose this section again. 
However, he/she is required to provide the detail of the policy which will be captured in proposal 
cum declaration form under PMFBY. 
 
Scope of coverage: All farmers eligible for crop insurance under PMFBY/WBCIS in the age 18 
to 70 years will be entitled to join. In case of multiple saving bank accounts held by an individual 
in one or different banks, the person would be eligible to join the scheme through one savings 
bank account only. Aadhar would be the primary KYC for the bank account. 
 
Enrollment Modality / Period: For new enrolments, the cover shall be provided for one year 
period starting from the date of enrolment or 1st June, whichever is later and the cover will end 
on next 31st May under PMFBY. New entrants into the eligible category from year to year or 
currently eligible individuals who did not join earlier shall be able to join in future years while 
the scheme is continuing. 
 
Benefits: As per the following table: 
 
Table of Benefits (anyone will be applicable) 
Sum Insured 
a. 
Death 
Rs. 2 Lakh 
b. 
Total and irrecoverable loss of both eyes or loss of use of both 
hands or feet or loss of sight of one eye and loss of use of hand or 
foot 
Rs. 2 Lakh 
c. 
Total and irrecoverable loss of sight of one eye or loss of use of 
one hand or foot 
Rs. 1 Lakh 
 
Premium: Rs.12/- per annum per member. The premium will be deducted from the account 
holder’s savings bank account through ‘auto debit’ facility in one installment with in the cut off 
dates as mentioned under PMFBY. 
 
Master Policy Holder: As mentioned in PMSBY, Participating Bank will be the Master policy 
holder on behalf of the participating subscribers.  
 
Termination of cover: The accident cover for the member shall terminate on any of the 
following events and no benefit will be payable there under: 
1. On attaining age 70 years (age nearest birthday).  

--- p4 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
4 
 
2. At the time of renewal, closure of account with the Bank or insufficiency of balance to 
keep the insurance in force.  
3. In case a member is covered through more than one account and premium is received by 
the Insurance Company inadvertently, insurance cover will be restricted to one only and 
the premium shall be liable to be forfeited.  
4. If the insurance cover is ceased due to any technical reasons such as insufficient balance 
on due date for renewal or due to any administrative issues, the same can be reinstated on 
receipt of full annual premium, subject to conditions that may be laid down. During this 
period, the risk cover will be suspended and reinstatement of risk cover will be at the sole 
discretion of Insurance Company.  
  
Administration of PMSBY: PMSBY, subject to the above, will be administered as per the 
standard procedure stipulated by the Insurance Company. The data flow process and data 
proforma will be provided separately. 
 
It will be the responsibility of the participating bank to recover the appropriate annual premium 
from the account holders within the prescribed period through ‘auto-debit’ process. 
 
Enrollment form / Auto-debit authorization in the prescribed proforma shall be obtained and 
retained by the participating bank. In case of claim, the Insurance Company may seek 
submission of the same. Insurance Company reserves the right to call for these documents at any 
point of time. 
 
The experience of the scheme will be monitored on yearly basis for re-calibration etc., as may be 
necessary. 
 
Appropriation of Premium: 
1) 
Insurance Premium to Insurance Company: Rs.10/- per annum per member  
2) 
Reimbursement of Expenses to BC/Micro/Corporate/Agent : Rs.1/- per annum per 
member  
3) 
Reimbursement of Administrative expenses to participating Bank: Rs.1/- per annum per 
member 
 
The scheme is liable to be discontinued prior to commencement of a new future renewal date if 
circumstances so require. 
 
Section -3: Life Insurance 
 
(as per Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojna (PMJJBY) 
 
Benefits: 
1. 
Death Cover: Rs. 2,00,000 per member  
2. 
To be provided by Life Insurance Companies  
 
Rules of the Scheme 
 
a) 
In these Rules, the following words and expressions shall unless repugnant to the context, 
have the following meanings:-  
b) 
“THE SCHEME” shall mean ‘PRADHAN MANTRI JEEVAN JYOTI BIMA YOJANA’ 
for the Savings Bank Account Holders of ‘BANK’.  

--- p5 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
5 
 
 
c) 
“THE RULES" shall mean the Rules of the Scheme as set out below and as amended 
from time to time.  
d) 
“THE MEMBER” shall mean a Savings Bank Account Holder who has been admitted to 
benefits of the Scheme and on whose life an assurance has been or is to be effected in accordance 
with these Rules.  
e) 
“TERMINAL DATE” shall mean in respect of each Member the Annual Renewal Date 
following the date on which member completes the age of 55 or the member closes his account 
with the Bank or discontinuance of premium payment whichever is earlier.  
f) 
“THE ASSURANCE” shall mean the particular Assurance to be effected on the life of 
the Member.  
g) 
“THE BENEFICIARY” shall mean the person or persons who has/have been appointed 
by the Member as Nominee and whose name or names have been entered in the Bank Records.  
 
Eligibility:- 
The savings bank account holder of the participating banks aged between 18 years (completed) 
and 50 years (age nearer birthday) and who have given the consent to join the scheme during the 
‘enrollment period’ are eligible to join the scheme. 
 
Admission of Age: 
Age as recorded by the Bank as per the Age Proof submitted by the Savings Bank Account 
holder. 
 
Evidence of Health: 
Satisfactory evidence of health as required by the insurance company shall be furnished by every 
eligible member, at the time of his entry into the Scheme, after the ‘Enrollment Period’, as 
incorporated in the “Consent-cum- Declaration Form” for joining the scheme. 
 
Premium: 
Premium to be deducted from member’s SB Account. The premium is Rs.330/- plus Service Tax 
(if payable). Renewal premium is chargeable as per the rate decided from time to time on Annual 
Renewal dates. 
 
Enrollment Modality / Period:  For new enrolments, the cover shall be provided for one year 
period starting from the date of enrolment or 1st June, whichever is later and the cover will end 
on next 31st May under PMFBY. New entrants into the eligible category from year to year or 
currently eligible individuals who did not join earlier shall be able to join in future years while 
the scheme is continuing. 
 
There will be no change in the existing relationship structure of Bank-insurance company which 
was established for PMJJY and here also the premium will be submitted to the insurance 
company with which bank is already tied up. If the farmer has already availed this section in the 
form of PMJJY, he/she need not to choose this section again. However, he/she is required to 
provide the detail of the policy which will be captured in proposal cum declaration form under 
PMFBY. 
 
Assurance: 
An assurance of Rs.2,00,000/- on death of the insured member is payable to the Nominee. 
 
Benefit on Death prior to Terminal Date: 

--- p6 ---
File No: 11019/01/2015-Credit-II(pt) 
6 
 
Upon the death of the Member prior to Terminal Date, the sum assured under the Assurance 
shall be payable to the nominated Beneficiary, provided the assurance is kept in force by 
payment of premium for that member. 
 
Termination of Assurance: 
The Assurance on the life of a Member shall terminate on an Annual Renewal Date upon 
happening of any of the following events and no benefit will become payable thereunder:-On 
attaining age 55 years (age nearest birthday) on annual renewal date. 
 
Closure of account with the Bank or insufficiency of balance to keep the insurance in force. 
 
Suspension of Risk: 
If the insurance cover is ceased due to any technical reasons such as insufficient balance for 
payment of premium on due date of renewal, the same can be reinstated after the grace period on 
receipt of premium and a satisfactory statement of good health. 
 
RESTRAINT ON ANTICIPATION OR ENCUMBRANCE: 
The benefits assured under the Scheme are strictly personal and cannot be assigned, charged or 
alienated in any way. 
 
Discontinuance or Amendment 